v0.11 changelog (#1629)
PennyLaneAI/catalyst: doc/releases/changelog-0.11.0.md

> <h3>New features since last release</h3>

Reviewer: maybe I am missing it somewhere, but qubit-invariant compilation should probably be in the new features section

Reviewer 2: Agreed!

      return qml.expval(qml.Z(0))
  ```

  Note that this optimization specifically targets operations that are exact inverses of each other 

>   when applied in sequence. For example, consecutive Hadamard gates pairs will be identified and eliminated.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  when applied in sequence. For example, consecutive Hadamard gate pairs will be identified and eliminated.
```

> * Three new compilation passes have been added to help convert Clifford + T gates to Pauli product measurements 
>   (PPMs) as prescribed in [arXiv:1808.02892](https://arxiv.org/abs/1808.02892v3). 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* A new intermediate representation and compilation framework has been added to Catalyst,
  to describe and manipulate programs in the Pauli product measurement (PPM) representation.
  As part of this framework, three new passes are now available to convert Clifford + T gates to
  Pauli product measurements as described in [arXiv:1808.02892](https://arxiv.org/abs/1808.02892v3). 
```

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* A new intermediate representation and compilation framework has been added to Catalyst
  to describe and manipulate programs in the Pauli product measurement (PPM) representation.
  As part of this framework, three new passes are now available to convert Clifford + T gates to
Pauli product measurements as described in [arXiv:1808.02892](https://arxiv.org/abs/1808.02892v3).
```

  [(#1499)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1499)
  [(#1551)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1551)
  [(#1563)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1563)
  [(#1564)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1564)
  [(#1577)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1577)
  
  These new compilation passes are currently only represented symbolically and are not yet executable 
  on any backend. They exist purely as intermediate representations for analysis and potential future 

>   xecution when a suitable backend is available.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  execution when a suitable backend is available.
```

>   These new compilation passes are currently only represented symbolically and are not yet executable 
>   on any backend. They exist purely as intermediate representations for analysis and potential future 
>   execution when a suitable backend is available.

Reviewer 2: Compilation passes don't execute on backends, it's the PPM circuits that aren't executable:
```suggestion
  Note that programs in the PPM representation cannot yet be executed on available backends.
  The passes currently exist for analysis, but may PPMs program may become executable in the future
  when a suitable backend is available.
```

>   The following new compilation passes have been added, and can be accessed from the :mod:`~.passes` 
>   module or in :func:`~.pipeline`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  The following compilation passes can now be accessed from the :mod:`~.passes` 
  module or in :func:`~.pipeline`:
```

  * :func:`catalyst.passes.to_ppr <~.passes.to_ppr>`: Clifford + T gates are converted into Pauli product 

>     rotations (PPRs) (:math:`\exp{iP \theta}`, where :math:`P` is a Pauli word (a product of Pauli operators)):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    rotations (PPRs) (:math:`\exp{iP \theta}`, where :math:`P` is a tensor product of Pauli operators):
```

>     * `H` gate → :math:`P = ZXZ` and :math:`\theta = \tfrac{\pi}{4}` 
>     * `S` gate → :math:`P = Z` and :math:`\theta = \tfrac{\pi}{4}` 
>     * `T` gate → :math:`P = Z` and :math:`\theta = \tfrac{\pi}{8}` 
>     * `CNOT` gate → :math:`P = (Z \otimes X)(-Z \otimes \mathbb{1})(-\mathbb{1} \otimes X)` and :math:`\theta = \tfrac{\pi}{4}` 

Reviewer 2: These equations are not correct, as they imply H and CNOT can be implemented as a single rotation (exponential). Instead H and CNOT need three rotations (rather than one rotation of a triple product):
```suggestion
    * `H` gate → 3 rotations with :math:`P_1 = Z, P_2 = X, P_3 = Z` and :math:`\theta = \tfrac{\pi}{4}` 
    * `S` gate → 1 rotation with :math:`P = Z` and :math:`\theta = \tfrac{\pi}{4}` 
    * `T` gate → 1 rotation with :math:`P = Z` and :math:`\theta = \tfrac{\pi}{8}` 
    * `CNOT` gate → 3 rotations with :math:`P_1 = (Z \otimes X), P_2 = (-Z \otimes \mathbb{1}), P_3 = (-\mathbb{1} \otimes X)` and :math:`\theta = \tfrac{\pi}{4}` 
```

  ```python
  import catalyst

  @catalyst.qjit(keep_intermediate=True)
  @catalyst.passes.to_ppr
  @qml.qnode(dev)
  def circuit():
      qml.H(0)
      qml.S(1)
      qml.T(0)
      qml.CNOT([0, 1])
      m1 = catalyst.measure(wires=0)
      m2 = catalyst.measure(wires=1)
      return m1, m2
  ```

  This circuit has the following representation in MLIR:
  ```mlir
    . . .
      %0 = quantum.alloc( 2) : !quantum.reg
      %1 = quantum.extract %0[ 1] : !quantum.reg -> !quantum.bit
      %2 = qec.ppr ["Z"](4) %1 : !quantum.bit
      %3 = quantum.extract %0[ 0] : !quantum.reg -> !quantum.bit
      %4 = qec.ppr ["Z"](4) %3 : !quantum.bit
      %5 = qec.ppr ["X"](4) %4 : !quantum.bit
      %6 = qec.ppr ["Z"](4) %5 : !quantum.bit
      %7 = qec.ppr ["Z"](8) %6 : !quantum.bit
      %8:2 = qec.ppr ["Z", "X"](4) %7, %2 : !quantum.bit, !quantum.bit
      %9 = qec.ppr ["Z"](-4) %8#0 : !quantum.bit
      %10 = qec.ppr ["X"](-4) %8#1 : !quantum.bit
      %mres, %out_qubits = qec.ppm ["Z"] %9 : !quantum.bit
      %mres_0, %out_qubits_1 = qec.ppm ["Z"] %10 : !quantum.bit
    . . .
  ```

>   * :func:`catalyst.passes.commute_ppr <~.passes.commute_ppr>`: Commuting Clifford PPR operations 
>     (PPRs with :math:`\theta = \tfrac{\pi}{4}`) to the end of a circuit, past non-Clifford PPRs (PPRs 
>     with :math:`\theta = \tfrac{\pi}{8}`)

Author: I don't think we necessarily need to list these
```suggestion
  :func:`catalyst.passes.commute_ppr <~.passes.commute_ppr>`: Commuting Clifford PPR operations 
  (PPRs with :math:`\theta = \tfrac{\pi}{4}`) to the end of a circuit, past non-Clifford PPRs (PPRs 
  with :math:`\theta = \tfrac{\pi}{8}`)
```

  
  ```python
  @catalyst.qjit(keep_intermediate=True)
  @catalyst.pipeline({"to_ppr": {}, "commute_ppr": {}})
  @qml.qnode(qml.device("null.qubit", wires=1))
  def circuit():
      qml.H(0)
      qml.T(0)

>       return measure(0)

Reviewer 4: Should we have some mlir output from these two examples with `commute_ppr` and `ppr_to_ppm`?

  ```

>   * :func:`catalyst.passes.ppr_to_ppm <~.passes.ppr_to_ppm>`: Absorbing Clifford PPRs into terminal 
>     Pauli product measurements (PPMs).

Author: ```suggestion
  :func:`catalyst.passes.ppr_to_ppm <~.passes.ppr_to_ppm>`: Absorbing Clifford PPRs into terminal 
  Pauli product measurements (PPMs).
```

Reviewer 2: To be honest I'm wondering if we aren't listing these in too much detail, do we really need these examples here instead of just giving a 1 sentence description of each pass? (the docs page should be able to provide enough detail)

>   Example:

Author: ```suggestion
```

  ```python
  @catalyst.qjit(keep_intermediate=True)
  @catalyst.pipeline({"to_ppr": {}, "commute_ppr": {}, "ppr_to_ppm": {}})
  @qml.qnode(qml.device("null.qubit", wires=1))
  def circuit():
      qml.H(0)
      qml.T(0)
      return measure(0)
  ```

  For more information on PPMs, please refer to our [PPM documentation page](https://pennylane.ai/compilation/pauli-product-measurement).

* Catalyst now supports PennyLane's `cond`, `for_loop` and `while_loop` control flow functions with

>   `experimental_capture=True`.

Reviewer 2: This should be an improvement, maybe regrouped with the transforms entry?

Something like:
> The following improvements have been made to the PLxPR program capture pipeline:
>  * control flow
>    ...
>  * transforms
>    ...

      %mres, %out_qubits = qec.ppm ["Z"] %9 : !quantum.bit
      %mres_0, %out_qubits_1 = qec.ppm ["Z"] %10 : !quantum.bit
    . . .
  ```

  * :func:`catalyst.passes.commute_ppr <~.passes.commute_ppr>`: Commuting Clifford PPR operations 
    (PPRs with :math:`\theta = \tfrac{\pi}{4}`) to the end of a circuit, past non-Clifford PPRs (PPRs 
    with :math:`\theta = \tfrac{\pi}{8}`)
  
  ```python
  @catalyst.qjit(keep_intermediate=True)
  @catalyst.pipeline({"to_ppr": {}, "commute_ppr": {}})
  @qml.qnode(qml.device("null.qubit", wires=1))
  def circuit():
      qml.H(0)
      qml.T(0)
      return measure(0)
  ```

  * :func:`catalyst.passes.ppr_to_ppm <~.passes.ppr_to_ppm>`: Absorbing Clifford PPRs into terminal 
    Pauli product measurements (PPMs).

  ```python
  @catalyst.qjit(keep_intermediate=True)
  @catalyst.pipeline({"to_ppr": {}, "commute_ppr": {}, "ppr_to_ppm": {}})
  @qml.qnode(qml.device("null.qubit", wires=1))
  def circuit():
      qml.H(0)
      qml.T(0)
      return measure(0)
  ```

  For more information on PPMs, please refer to our [PPM documentation page](https://pennylane.ai/compilation/pauli-product-measurement).

> * Catalyst now supports qubit number-invariant compilation. That is, programs can be compiled without

Reviewer 4: @josh146 @dime10

  a transform.
  [(#1468)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1468)
  [(#1509)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1509)
  [(#1521)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1521)
  [(#1544)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1544)
  [(#1561)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1561)
  [(#1567)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1567)
  [(#1578)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1578)

  Using PennyLane's program capture mechanism involves setting `experimental_capture=True` in the qjit 
  decorator. With this present, the following control flow functions in PennyLane are now usable with
  qjit:

  * Support for `qml.cond`:

    ```python
    import pennylane as qml
    from catalyst import qjit

    dev = qml.device("lightning.qubit", wires=1)

    @qjit(experimental_capture=True)
    @qml.qnode(dev)
    def circuit(x: float):

        def ansatz_true():
            qml.RX(x, wires=0)
            qml.Hadamard(wires=0)

        def ansatz_false():
            qml.RY(x, wires=0)

        qml.cond(x > 1.4, ansatz_true, ansatz_false)()

        return qml.expval(qml.Z(0))
    ```

>   * Support for `qml.for_loop`:

Reviewer 4: code example needed

>   * Support for `qml.while_loop`:

Reviewer 4: code example needed

  and manipulate programs in the Pauli product measurement (PPM) representation. As part of this framework, 
  three new passes are now available to convert Clifford + T gates to Pauli product measurements as 
  described in [arXiv:1808.02892](https://arxiv.org/abs/1808.02892v3).
  [(#1499)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1499)
  [(#1551)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1551)
  [(#1563)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1563)
  [(#1564)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1564)
  [(#1577)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1577)
  
  Note that programs in the PPM representation cannot yet be executed on available backends.
  The passes currently exist for analysis, but PPM programs may become executable in the future
  when a suitable backend is available.

  The following new compilation passes can be accessed from the :mod:`~.passes` module or in :func:`~.pipeline`:

  * :func:`catalyst.passes.to_ppr <~.passes.to_ppr>`: Clifford + T gates are converted into Pauli product 
    rotations (PPRs) (:math:`\exp{iP \theta}`, where :math:`P` is a tensor product of Pauli operators):

>     * `H` gate → 3 rotations with :math:`P_1 = Z, P_2 = X, P_3 = Z` and :math:`\theta = \tfrac{\pi}{4}` 
>     * `S` gate → 1 rotation with :math:`P = Z` and :math:`\theta = \tfrac{\pi}{4}` 
>     * `T` gate → 1 rotation with :math:`P = Z` and :math:`\theta = \tfrac{\pi}{8}` 
>     * `CNOT` gate → 3 rotations with :math:`P_1 = (Z \otimes X), P_2 = (-Z \otimes \mathbb{1}), P_3 = (-\mathbb{1} \otimes X)` and :math:`\theta = \tfrac{\pi}{4}` 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    * `H` gate: 3 rotations with :math:`P_1 = Z, P_2 = X, P_3 = Z` and :math:`\theta = \tfrac{\pi}{4}` 
    * `S` gate: 1 rotation with :math:`P = Z` and :math:`\theta = \tfrac{\pi}{4}` 
    * `T` gate: 1 rotation with :math:`P = Z` and :math:`\theta = \tfrac{\pi}{8}` 
    * `CNOT` gate: 3 rotations with :math:`P_1 = (Z \otimes X), P_2 = (-Z \otimes \mathbb{1}), P_3 = (-\mathbb{1} \otimes X)` and :math:`\theta = \tfrac{\pi}{4}` 
```

* Catalyst now supports qubit number-invariant compilation. That is, programs can be compiled without
  specifying the number of qubits to allocate ahead of time. Instead, the device can be supplied with
  a dynamic program variable as the number of wires.
  [(#1549)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1549)
  [(#1553)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1553)
  [(#1565)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1565)
  [(#1574)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1574)

  For example, the following toy workflow is now supported, where the number of qubits, `n`, is provided
  as an argument to a qjit'd function:

  ```python
  import catalyst
  import pennylane as qml

  @catalyst.qjit(autograph=True)
  def f(n):  
      device = qml.device("lightning.qubit", wires=n, shots=10)

      @qml.qnode(device)
      def circuit():

          for i in range(n):
              qml.RX(1.5, wires=i)

          return qml.counts()

      return circuit()
  ```

  ```pycon
  >>> f(3)
  (Array([0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7], dtype=int64),
  Array([0, 0, 3, 2, 3, 1, 1, 0], dtype=int64))
  >>> f(10)

>   (Array([ 0,  1,  2,  3,  4,  5,  6,  7,  8,  9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15],      dtype=int64),

Reviewer 2: 10 qubits would produce 1024 entries no?

Reviewer 4: Yep! Typo 

```suggestion
  >>> f(4)
  (Array([ 0,  1,  2,  3,  4,  5,  6,  7,  8,  9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15],      dtype=int64),
```

  a transform.
  [(#1468)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1468)
  [(#1509)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1509)
  [(#1521)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1521)
  [(#1544)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1544)
  [(#1561)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1561)
  [(#1567)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1567)
  [(#1578)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1578)

  Using PennyLane's program capture mechanism involves setting `experimental_capture=True` in the qjit 
  decorator. With this present, the following control flow functions in PennyLane are now usable with
  qjit:

  * Support for `qml.cond`:

    ```python
    import pennylane as qml
    from catalyst import qjit

    dev = qml.device("lightning.qubit", wires=1)

    @qjit(experimental_capture=True)
    @qml.qnode(dev)
    def circuit(x: float):

        def ansatz_true():
            qml.RX(x, wires=0)
            qml.Hadamard(wires=0)

        def ansatz_false():
            qml.RY(x, wires=0)

        qml.cond(x > 1.4, ansatz_true, ansatz_false)()

        return qml.expval(qml.Z(0))

>     ```

Reviewer: for some reason this doesn't register as the end of the codefence on github, leading to the weird rendering below 🤔

Reviewer 4: :notlikethis:

            qml.RX(x, wires=0)
            qml.CNOT(wires=[0, 1])

            return c + 1
        
        loop(0)
        return qml.expval(qml.Z(0))
    ```

    ```pycon
    >>> circuit(0.1)
    Array(0.97526892, dtype=float64)
    ```

  Additionally, Catalyst can now apply its own compilation passes when equivalent transforms are provided 
  by PennyLane (e.g., `cancel_inverses` and `merge_rotations`). In cases where Catalyst does not have 
  its own analogous implementation of a transform available in PennyLane, the transform will be expanded 
  according to rules provided by PennyLane.

  For example, consider this workflow that contains two PennyLane transforms: `cancel_inverses` and 
  `single_qubit_fusion`. Catalyst has its own implementation of `cancel_inverses` in the `passes` module, 
  and will smartly invoke its implementation intead. Conversely, Catalyst does not have its own implementation
  of `single_qubit_fusion`, and will therefore resort to PennyLane's implementation of the transform.

  ```python
  dev = qml.device("lightning.qubit", wires=1)

  @qjit(experimental_capture=True)
  def func(r1, r2):

      @qml.transforms.single_qubit_fusion

>       @qml.transforms.cancel_inverses

Reviewer 2: I think in this order both would be applied on the plxpr, `cancel_inverses` would have to come after `single_qubit_fusion` to be applied in Catalyst.

Reviewer 4: Ah yes you're right :) 

```suggestion
      @qml.transforms.cancel_inverses
      @qml.transforms.single_qubit_fusion
```

  >>> r1 = jnp.array([0.1, 0.2, 0.3])
  >>> r2 = jnp.array([0.4, 0.5, 0.6])
  >>> func(r1, r2)
  Array(0.7872403, dtype=float64)
  ```

<h3>Improvements 🛠</h3>

* The `merge-rotations` peephole optimization pass has been extended to also merge compatible rotation 
  gates (either both controlled, or both uncontrolled) where rotation angles are any combination of 
  static constants or dynamic values.
  [(#1489)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1489)

* Several changes have been made to reduce compile time:
  * MLIR's verifier has been turned off.
    [(#1513)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1513)
  * Unnecessary I/O has been removed.
    [(#1514)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1514)
    [(#1602)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1602)
  * Improvements have been made to reduce complexity and memory.
    [(#1524)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1524)
  * IR canonicalization and LLVMIR textual generation is now performed lazily.
    [(#1530)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1530)
  * Speed up how tracers are overwritten for hybrid ops.
    [(#1622)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1622)

> * Catalyst now decomposes non-differentiable gates when differentiating through workflows.

Reviewer 2: We should also mention that verification has been improved for the parameter-shift method, circuits are now verified to be fully compatible with Catalyst's parameter-shift implementation before compilation.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Catalyst now decomposes non-differentiable gates when differentiating through workflows. Additionally, with `diff_method=parameter-shift`,
  circuits are now verified to be fully compatible with Catalyst's parameter-shift implementation before compilation.
```

      return qml.expval(qml.Z(0))
  ```

> * Catalyst now supports PennyLane transforms captured as plxpr.

Reviewer 2: Does this affect the user or is it internal? What is the new thing they get access to ?

      return circuit(x)
  ```

  ```pycon
  >>> func(0.1)
  Array(0.99500417, dtype=float64)  
  ```

<h3>Improvements 🛠</h3>

* Pattern rewriting in the `quantum-to-ion` lowering pass has been changed to use MLIR's dialect conversion
  infrastructure.

>   [(#1442)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1442)

Reviewer 2: Sounds like an internal change to me

> * Pattern rewritting in the `quantum-to-ion` lowering pass has been changed to use MLIR's dialect conversion
>   infrastracture.
>   [(#1442)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1442)

Author: ```suggestion
* Pattern rewriting in the `quantum-to-ion` lowering pass has been changed to use MLIR's dialect conversion
  infrastructure.
  [(#1442)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1442)
```

* The `merge-rotations` peephole optimization pass has been extended to also merge compatible rotation 
  gates (either both controlled, or both uncontrolled) where rotation angles are any combination of 
  static constants or dynamic values.

>   [(#1489)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1489)

Reviewer 2: Sounds almost like a bug fix introduce by the splitting of the gates into static and dynamic (another PR).

Reviewer 2: Just had another look, this PR was actually reverted and the entry should be removed. See also:
```
* Reverted `StaticCustomOp` in favour of adding helper functions `isStatic()`, `getStaticParams()`
  to the `CustomOp` which preserves the same functionality. More specifically, this reverts
  [#1387] and [#1396], modifies [#1484].
```

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```

* Several changes have been made to reduce compile time:
  * MLIR's verifier has been turned off.
    [(#1513)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1513)
  * Unnecessary I/O has been removed.
    [(#1514)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1514)
    [(#1602)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1602)
  * Improvements have been made to reduce complexity and memory.
    [(#1524)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1524)
  * IR canonicalization and LLVMIR textual generation is now performed lazily.
    [(#1530)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1530)

>   - Speed up how tracers are overwritten for hybrid ops.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * Speed up how tracers are overwritten for hybrid ops.
```

Reviewer 2: Just for consistency with the above changes. Having said that, I actually like using different symbols for the first and second levels, I think that improves readability!

  for the `StatePrep`, `BasisState`, and `QubitUnitary` operations. For the parameter-shift method,
  this is allowable for all operations.

> * Several changes have been made to support dynamic qubit specification:

Reviewer 2: This is the missing feature @josh146 is looking for, let's move it to the top.
```suggestion
* Catalyst now supports qubit number-invariant compilation! That is, programs can be compiled without
  specifying the number of qubits to allocate ahead of times. Instead, the device can be supplied with
  a dynamic program variable as the number of wires.
```

We also need to add an example to this feature.

  * The `qalloc_p` custom JAX primitive can now take in a dynamic number of qubits as a tracer
    and lower it to mlir.
    [(#1549)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1549)

  * `ComputationalBasisOp` can now take in a quantum register in mlir, instead of an explicit, fixed-size 
    list of qubits.
    [(#1553)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1553)

  * Non-observable measurements without explicit wires will now compile to `ComputationalBasisOp` with 
    a quantum register, instead of the explicit list of all qubits on the device. This means the same 
    compiled IR can be reused even if the device changes its number of qubits across runs. This includes 
    `probs(), state(), sample(), counts()`.
    [(#1565)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1565)

  * In mlir, `ProbsOp, StateOp, SampleOp, CountsOp` ops now carry an optional new SSA operand for their 
    return shapes. This operand is used during bufferization pass to allocate result memrefs dynamically.
    A new verification is added to check that this new operand and static return shapes cannot coexist.

>     [(#1574)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1574)

Reviewer 2: These are technical/internal descriptions, instead we should focus the changelog entry on what the feature enables for the user.

Reviewer 4: Done!

* An `mlir_opt` property has been added to `qjit` to access the optimized MLIR representation of a compiled 
  function.

>   [(#1579)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1579)

Reviewer 2: A small example would be nice

* The error message in `catalyst.mitigate_with_zne` has been improved.

>   [(#1603)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1603)

Reviewer 2: What error message?

<h3>Breaking changes 💔</h3>

🦗... 🦗... 🦗...

<h3>Deprecations 👋</h3>

🦗... 🦗... 🦗...

> 

Reviewer 3: The crickets are cute, but if we don't have anything for these should we just remove the sections?

Reviewer: Agree, let's remove these two sections :) This is what I typically do when sections are empty

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```

  for the `StatePrep`, `BasisState`, and `QubitUnitary` operations. For the parameter-shift method,
  this is allowable for all operations.

> * An `mlir_opt` property has been added to `qjit` to access the optimized MLIR representation of a compiled 
>   function.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* An `mlir_opt` property has been added to `qjit` to access the optimized MLIR representation of a compiled 
  function. This is the representation of the program after running everything in the MLIR stage of the entire pipeline.
```

  [(#1584)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1584)

* Fixed an issue where Catalyst could give incorrect results for circuits containing `qml.StatePrep`.
  [(#1491)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1491)

* Fixed an issue where using autograph in conjunction with catalyst passes caused a crash.
  [(#1541)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1541)

* Fixed an issue where using
  autograph in conjunction with catalyst pipeline caused a crash.
  [(#1576)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1576)

* Fixed an issue where using
  chained catalyst passes decorators caused a crash.
  [(#1576)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1576)

* Specialized handling for `pipeline`s was added.
  [(#1599)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1599)

* Fixed an issue where using
  autograph with control/adjoint functions used on operator objects caused a crash.
  [(#1605)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1605)

* Fixed an issue where using
  pytrees inside a loop with autograph caused falling back to Python.
  [(#1601)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1601)

> 

Reviewer 4: ````suggestion

For example, the following example will now be captured and executed properly with Autograph enabled:

```python
from catalyst import qjit

def updateList(x):
    return [x[0]+1, x[1]+2]

@qjit(autograph=True)
def fn(x):
    for i in range(4):
        x = updateList(x)
    return x
```

```pycon
>>> fn([1, 2])
[Array(5, dtype=int64), Array(10, dtype=int64)]
```

````

Reviewer 4: @josh146

Reviewer: looks good!

  for the `StatePrep`, `BasisState`, and `QubitUnitary` operations. For the parameter-shift method,
  this is allowable for all operations.

> * An `mlir_opt` property has been added to `qjit` to access the optimized MLIR representation of a compiled 

Reviewer: @dime10 what's the difference between this and `qjit.mlir`? Is `mlir_opt` simply the output MLIR post optimizations?

Reviewer 2: `qjit.mlir` is the IR the Catalyst core receives as input, and `qjit.mlir_opt` it produces as output, that is after running everything in the MLIR stage of the entire pipeline.

  function.
  [(#1579)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1579)
  [(#1637)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1637)

  ```python
  from catalyst import qjit

  @qjit
  def f(x):
      return x**2
  ```

  ```pycon

>   >>> f(2)

Reviewer: This is a _very_ long output!

Reviewer 2: Yes I think it would be sufficient to just print the first few lines maybe?

  Array(4, dtype=int64)
  >>> print(f.mlir_opt)
  module @f {
    llvm.func @__catalyst__rt__finalize()
    llvm.func @__catalyst__rt__initialize(!llvm.ptr)
    llvm.func @_mlir_memref_to_llvm_alloc(i64) -> !llvm.ptr
    llvm.func @jit_f(%arg0: !llvm.ptr, %arg1: !llvm.ptr, %arg2: i64) -> !llvm.struct<(ptr, ptr, i64)> attributes {llvm.copy_memref, llvm.emit_c_interface} {
      %0 = llvm.mlir.constant(0 : index) : i64
      %1 = llvm.mlir.constant(64 : index) : i64
      %2 = llvm.mlir.constant(1 : index) : i64
      %3 = llvm.mlir.constant(3735928559 : index) : i64
      %4 = llvm.load %arg1 : !llvm.ptr -> i64
      %5 = llvm.mul %4, %4 : i64
      %6 = llvm.mlir.zero : !llvm.ptr
      %7 = llvm.getelementptr %6[1] : (!llvm.ptr) -> !llvm.ptr, i64
      %8 = llvm.ptrtoint %7 : !llvm.ptr to i64
      %9 = llvm.add %8, %1 : i64
      %10 = llvm.call @_mlir_memref_to_llvm_alloc(%9) : (i64) -> !llvm.ptr
      %11 = llvm.ptrtoint %10 : !llvm.ptr to i64

>       %12 = llvm.sub %1, %2 : i64
>       %13 = llvm.add %11, %12 : i64
>       %14 = llvm.urem %13, %1  : i64
>       %15 = llvm.sub %13, %14 : i64
>       %16 = llvm.inttoptr %15 : i64 to !llvm.ptr
>       %17 = llvm.mlir.undef : !llvm.struct<(ptr, ptr, i64)>
>       %18 = llvm.insertvalue %10, %17[0] : !llvm.struct<(ptr, ptr, i64)> 
>       %19 = llvm.insertvalue %16, %18[1] : !llvm.struct<(ptr, ptr, i64)> 
>       %20 = llvm.insertvalue %0, %19[2] : !llvm.struct<(ptr, ptr, i64)> 
>       llvm.store %5, %16 : i64, !llvm.ptr
>       %21 = llvm.ptrtoint %10 : !llvm.ptr to i64
>       %22 = llvm.icmp "eq" %3, %21 : i64
>       llvm.cond_br %22, ^bb1, ^bb2
>     ^bb1:  // pred: ^bb0
>       %23 = llvm.mlir.zero : !llvm.ptr
>       %24 = llvm.getelementptr %23[1] : (!llvm.ptr) -> !llvm.ptr, i64
>       %25 = llvm.ptrtoint %24 : !llvm.ptr to i64
>       %26 = llvm.call @_mlir_memref_to_llvm_alloc(%25) : (i64) -> !llvm.ptr
>       %27 = llvm.mlir.undef : !llvm.struct<(ptr, ptr, i64)>
>       %28 = llvm.insertvalue %26, %27[0] : !llvm.struct<(ptr, ptr, i64)> 
>       %29 = llvm.insertvalue %26, %28[1] : !llvm.struct<(ptr, ptr, i64)> 
>       %30 = llvm.insertvalue %0, %29[2] : !llvm.struct<(ptr, ptr, i64)> 
>       %31 = llvm.mlir.zero : !llvm.ptr
>       %32 = llvm.getelementptr %31[1] : (!llvm.ptr) -> !llvm.ptr, i64
>       %33 = llvm.ptrtoint %32 : !llvm.ptr to i64
>       %34 = llvm.mul %33, %2 : i64
>       "llvm.intr.memcpy"(%26, %16, %34) <{isVolatile = false}> : (!llvm.ptr, !llvm.ptr, i64) -> ()
>       llvm.br ^bb3(%30 : !llvm.struct<(ptr, ptr, i64)>)
>     ^bb2:  // pred: ^bb0
>       llvm.br ^bb3(%20 : !llvm.struct<(ptr, ptr, i64)>)
>     ^bb3(%35: !llvm.struct<(ptr, ptr, i64)>):  // 2 preds: ^bb1, ^bb2
>       llvm.br ^bb4
>     ^bb4:  // pred: ^bb3
>       llvm.return %35 : !llvm.struct<(ptr, ptr, i64)>
>     }
>     llvm.func @_catalyst_pyface_jit_f(%arg0: !llvm.ptr, %arg1: !llvm.ptr) {
>       %0 = llvm.load %arg1 : !llvm.ptr -> !llvm.struct<(ptr, ptr)>
>       %1 = llvm.extractvalue %0[0] : !llvm.struct<(ptr, ptr)> 
>       llvm.call @_catalyst_ciface_jit_f(%arg0, %1) : (!llvm.ptr, !llvm.ptr) -> ()
>       llvm.return
>     }
>     llvm.func @_catalyst_ciface_jit_f(%arg0: !llvm.ptr, %arg1: !llvm.ptr) attributes {llvm.copy_memref, llvm.emit_c_interface} {
>       %0 = llvm.load %arg1 : !llvm.ptr -> !llvm.struct<(ptr, ptr, i64)>
>       %1 = llvm.extractvalue %0[0] : !llvm.struct<(ptr, ptr, i64)> 
>       %2 = llvm.extractvalue %0[1] : !llvm.struct<(ptr, ptr, i64)> 
>       %3 = llvm.extractvalue %0[2] : !llvm.struct<(ptr, ptr, i64)> 
>       %4 = llvm.call @jit_f(%1, %2, %3) : (!llvm.ptr, !llvm.ptr, i64) -> !llvm.struct<(ptr, ptr, i64)>
>       llvm.store %4, %arg0 : !llvm.struct<(ptr, ptr, i64)>, !llvm.ptr
>       llvm.return
>     }
>     llvm.func @setup() {
>       %0 = llvm.mlir.zero : !llvm.ptr
>       llvm.call @__catalyst__rt__initialize(%0) : (!llvm.ptr) -> ()
>       llvm.return
>     }
>     llvm.func @teardown() {
>       llvm.call @__catalyst__rt__finalize() : () -> ()
>       llvm.return
>     }
>   }

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  module @f {
    llvm.func @__catalyst__rt__finalize()
    llvm.func @__catalyst__rt__initialize(!llvm.ptr)
    llvm.func @_mlir_memref_to_llvm_alloc(i64) -> !llvm.ptr
    llvm.func @jit_f(%arg0: !llvm.ptr, %arg1: !llvm.ptr, %arg2: i64) -> !llvm.struct<(ptr, ptr, i64)> attributes {llvm.copy_memref, llvm.emit_c_interface} 
    ...
    llvm.func @teardown() {
      llvm.call @__catalyst__rt__finalize() : () -> ()
      llvm.return
    }
  }
```

  [(#1478)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1478)

* All dialects are loaded preemptively. This allows third-party plugins to load their dialects.
  [(#1584)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1584)

* Fixed an issue where Catalyst could give incorrect results for circuits containing `qml.StatePrep`.
  [(#1491)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1491)

* Fixed an issue where using autograph in conjunction with catalyst passes caused a crash.
  [(#1541)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1541)

* Fixed an issue where using
  autograph in conjunction with catalyst pipeline caused a crash.
  [(#1576)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1576)

* Fixed an issue where using
  chained catalyst passes decorators caused a crash.
  [(#1576)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1576)

* Specialized handling for `pipeline`s was added.
  [(#1599)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1599)

* Fixed an issue where using
  autograph with control/adjoint functions used on operator objects caused a crash.
  [(#1605)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1605)

* Fixed an issue where using

>   pytrees inside a loop with autograph caused falling back to Python.

Reviewer: Curious for a code example here?

    The switch is `OFF` by default, and OQD can be built from source via `make all ENABLE_OQD=ON`, or 
    `make runtime ENABLE_OQD=ON`.
    [(#1508)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1508)

  * Ion dialect now supports phonon modes using `ion.modes` operation.
    [(#1517)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1517)

  * Rotation angles are normalized to avoid negative duration for pulses during ion dialect lowering.
    [(#1517)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1517)

  * Catalyst now generates OpenAPL programs for Pennylane circuits of up to two qubits using the OQD device.
    [(#1517)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1517)

  * The end-to-end compilation pipeline for OQD devices is available as an API function.
    [(#1545)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1545)

* The source code has been updated to comply with changes requested by black v25.1.0
  [(#1490)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1490)

* Reverted `StaticCustomOp` in favour of adding helper functions `isStatic()`, `getStaticParams()`
  to the `CustomOp` which preserves the same functionality. More specifically, this reverts

>   [#1387] and [#1396], modifies [#1484].

Reviewer 2: 1484 is the issue, 1489 is the actual PR.
```suggestion
  [#1387] and [#1396], modifies [#1489].
```
